Thank you so much.
Uh, we have one hour with you, so, uh, if you would like
to start with some opening remarks
and then our members will have questions.
Thank you.
Well, and thank you, um, for the
opportunity to come today and attend the hearing
and answer questions
and hopefully give you some background on,
um, New Zealand post.
Um, it's my first select committee hearing
as Chair of Zel Post.
So, um, um, I'm particularly grateful to have
with me today David Walsh, who's
our longstanding chief executive.
So in, uh,
full year 25 New Zealand Post reported a loss of 2 million,
um, that was 12 million short of plan, um,
but it was also 12 million improvement on the previous
financial year and a 54 million lift over
the last two years.
Behind this result were par parcel volumes of 88 million,
up from 84 million in full year 24, supported
by the purchase of the BPT customer base.
The softer economic cycle, uh, made
for a tougher year than planned,
I think goes without saying.
And we responded through cost management,
which we have continued
to improve our cost structures in order to, um,
improve performance in the current year.
Um, financial performance of our Flyway
and supply chain solutions investments has also improved.
And you may be aware that in the first few years post COVID,
um, we were behind plan on those investments.
But that is, um, coming through strongly now
and continued into the current year.
Our infrastructure investment program
to build a scale scalable modern
parcel network is now complete.
The Auckland Processing Center in weary and in
and our new automated delivery depot at Mount Rosco,
our fully operational
and performing well, they, um,
really are something to behold.
So anytime you have the opportunity to visit our sites,
we would warmly welcome you
because it's truly a multi-generational investment
that has been made in the future of New Zealand Post.
We continue to operate a commercially
sustainable mail service.
Mail volumes continue to decline
with 158 million letters delivered in full year 25.
Um, that's down from 187 million in the
previous financial year.
And that's part of a long-term decline that we see across
every jurisdiction in mail
and, um, presents its own challenges
and opportunities in terms of our future business strategy.
We continue to balance mail pricing with service
and cost management to achieve acceptable margins
and meet expectations of our customers
to ensure we can continue to effectively respond
to future volume reductions.
The government has recently signed
with New Zealand Post an amended deed of understanding.
This provides New Zealand Post
with urban mail delivery flexibility, um, from three days
to two days per week.
Rural mail delivery flexibility from five days
to three days per week,
and a reduction in the minimum number of retail points
of presence from 880 to 500 initially.
Our first priority is to make changes to the urban
retail network to ensure we have the right number
of stores in the right locations
while providing quality customer service.
For example, we recently opened a new retail hub in New
Market Auckland, and we're planning to open more
of these retail hubs that will be complemented, um,
with our retail partner network.
Now, again, this is a great site to go to see.
So while we are going to close some postal shops, um,
that have low usage, um, we do intend to upgrade, um, many
of the ones that we will keep into the future
to ensure our customers have a much better
customer experience.
Right now, New Zealand post is in the
busiest season of the year.
The auditor who looks
after New Zealand post out there said,
you're very busy delivering Christmas,
and I thought that was absolutely right.
We are very busy delivering Christmas
and um, thought it was a delightful way to think of the role
that post plays in the community.
We delivered 2.3 million parcels last week
and are predicting to deliver 2.4 million parcels this week.
Wow. And just to give you a sense of what happens
with Black Friday sales, um, yesterday we had a,
uh, we processed over a half a million parcels.
Wow. So it was the second highest day, um,
that we've experienced,
and we are expecting this
to continue now through this period.
We're incredibly proud to support all of our customers,
including our newest customer, ikea, um,
with our unmatched networked maximize trading, um,
during the festive holiday season.
Looking ahead, we expect to continue
to improve our commercial performance.
We remain focused on cost containment, growing the business,
and being a regular dividend payer over the coming here,
I'm very happy to take Thank you questions.
So we go first to
Thank you very much for coming
in, in this really busy period.
I have some questions for you about, um, the costs
for consumers and also the competition
that you're seeing in your market.
Um, and then if I get to return, um,
I'll ask you about workforce issues.
Um, so thinking about these stamps,
they're now almost $3.
Um, New Zealand Post has chosen to put
that up twice in the last two years,
and what's cost inflation for around 25%.
How are you thinking about those price increases
for small businesses
and consumers, particularly older Kiwis,
who rely on those connections as vital connective services
that are of a public good?
Yeah, I, I guess it's one of the hardest decisions right,
in the face of declining volumes,
and we do expect that decline to continue.
Um, but under the current deed, um, New Zealand Post,
um, will no longer receive any support for
maintaining its network.
So we have to do that in a financially sustainable way. So
To, so what impact has the, the minister's expectations
that New Zealand Post will prioritize dividends
to the government played into those cost
increases for consumers?
You know, we, we right now are trying to make sure
that the postal side letter side can cover, you know,
can cover its cost and maintain a reasonable margin.
We don't, you know, our ability in the future
to grow dividends is gonna very much be driven
by the growth part of the business, which is parcels.
There's no question about it.
And interestingly, I think in the medium term,
once the number of letters drops to a certain level,
we'll see the ability to deliver through the parcel network
and you'll actually see those costs come down
and some point in the future as well as the level
of service will go potentially up again.
So I, you know, it's, it's a really hard transition,
I think is the honest truth, both in terms of price and,
and the, um, how, how often deliveries are made,
but we're doing our very best to manage it as well as we can
both for our customers, also for the shareholder.
Um, I think we're doing a remarkable job if you compare
how this is fairing compared to other jurisdictions,
and I think we've got a great medium term plan on
how we can continue to meet the need of customers.
Doesn't mean higher prices for stamps, I'm afraid it does.
And it, you know,
that picture doesn't change for a few years. Um,
I hope I can come back to the affordability point,
but, um, just something you've said there really sparks my
interest around what you see the market dynamics playing
out around this.
Um, you have a competitor, um, who is busily trying
to make market share against your market share.
Um, it is, do we have a problem here in New Zealand's market
where we might end up with New Zealand post offering those
vital connections to communities
that it can no longer cross subsidize if it loses more
market share to a mix?
Well, a mix, um, is competing with us on the parcel side.
Mm-hmm. So we do have competition on the letter side
in the urban areas.
And, you know, that presents challenges to us.
I'm not going to pretend it doesn't,
because we have a, we have under the deed a commitment
to provide, um, service to the whole country.
They don't need to do that.
They can cherry pick those areas
where the return is highest.
Exactly. Um, does that, um, uh,
and I'm not saying that to plead for, you know,
it's not a special pleading at all
because we think we've got a means to deal with that.
And in the future, actually it will be important
to supporting our rural network anyway.
So, you know, that that is the case.
We face competition both on the letter and the parcel side.
Um, the parcel side, if that's what you were asking about,
the competitive environment, anytime the economy is soft,
you're going to see intense competition
margins will probably get squeezed.
Everyone will compete hard for whatever business is there.
And that's exactly what we've seen.
And we are really confident that with our new investments,
that makes us more competitive on the cost side,
that we are competing and winning in the marketplace.
We're both retaining customers in the parcel business
and we're gaining customers.
And IKEA is a great example.
We got part of that business
and our new investments, you know,
the processing center in Auckland is world leading.
And, you know, there's no doubt that that will help us to,
um, meet, um, our own expectations that
of the community and the shareholder in the future.
I guess, um, the, my question about the,
there is this book of 10 stamps now costs about $30,
which is fine for an MP sending leaders to constituents,
but isn't fine for those small businesses who are wearing
that and then passing it back to the consumers
or those, those older New Zealanders who rely on post,
are they sending fewer packages, fewer leaders, um,
and will that have a long term impact on New Zealand post's
ability to compete with than a competitor
that might change the market dynamics later on?
There's a long term decline in people sending letters
everywhere in the world.
We're no different. Um, and that will continue.
And I mean, in the most recent period, as an example,
we did the local election mailouts.
Mm-hmm. That was, it's very important to New Zealand post,
but in the future that will go, it's a matter of time,
not our decision, but you see it happening everywhere.
The banks, insurance companies, everyone's moving
to digital mailouts.
So we will see a long-term decline.
And the hardest decision for us is to judge what
that decline is going to be just
because of the transition to digital mail, um,
and do enough to cover our costs
and continue to provide a service to those
who don't have another option,
but not do it not increase the prices so much
that we actually speed up the transition away from most.
Is that happening? Well, there's no way to know.
Um, I think in the past we probably were slow
to respond potentially to the decline,
but, you know, it's, you just don't know.
And I mean, I'm an economist by training.
I last board meeting said to them,
can't we do some on a metric analysis to try to understand
what the elasticity is here so we know
whether we're just doing enough to maintain the service and,
and hitting it matching the natural decline.
Or are we actually pricing in a way that is accelerating
and the we just can't do that?
Um, I'm afraid, I mean, I was very keen
to a answer the same question
and, uh, I accept that that can't be done.
Yeah. Yeah. Uh, supplementary from Dr. David, um,
You mentioned that, uh,
rural mail will go from five times a week
to three times a week, and, uh,
I think the rural constituents will be really interested
to hear how you will be managing that dynamic in relation
to small parcels as well.
So what's the interaction between the two
and, um, how will you maintain that public good service
that we've all come to recognize and appreciate?
I think a lot, some of what you have to remember on these
changes is we, we are allowed to go up to that amount
when and when we do is will be driven
by the business dynamics.
So, uh, I think that's really important to understand.
But the dynamic between the mail
and the parcel delivery days, the deed has stipulated that
for the letters that we, we can go down to three.
It doesn't mean that we will only deliver parcels for
that number of days.
And I'll just let Dave briefly comment on that. Yeah, sure.
Yeah. The, the D talks about the minimum
of rural delivery frequency,
but primarily
what drives our rural network is parcel demand and parcel demand.
And much of the retail of rural
network is still very strong.
So we still expect for the largest majority
of the rural network will continue to live five days a week.
We may only inject mail into it three days in some cases,
but, uh, there will be some parts
of the network over time will make a decision on can
that other network sustain five days of parcel delivery.
But I think right now it's not the highest order of,
uh, priority for us.
Most of our rural delivery will
continue as you see it today.
Mm-hmm. And so the system optimization
between the two forms is what I'm hearing?
Yeah. Yeah. So we'll, we'll continue to, uh, just, uh,
monitor that demand for male services.
Uh, in fact, uh, this year we've seen, uh, our rural demand
for parcel delivers be stronger, uh,
growth than we've seen in urban museum.
Uh, so, uh, yeah, I know
how well regarded the rural delivery drivers are
in, uh, rural New Zealand.
They do a fantastic job for us.
Uh, but uh, as I mentioned right now, uh,
they are doing in a pretty full delivering
parcel, uh, demand at the moment.
If there are communities that are affected, uh, when we need
to re-look at this, we will of course, uh, engage
with those communities and,
and, uh, advise 'em
what we're thinking about. Thank you. Mm-hmm.
A new brand from Barbara. Uh, thank you so much.
Um, oh, first of all, just acknowledge the right,
honorable Jim Bulger, who was a couple of cheers before you.
I mean, I know a lot of New Zealand posters are for life,
so I I appreciate some
of your staff may have worked with him since then.
Um, just looking at more your financial results,
despite an improvement
of 12 million off your forecasted amount, were you surprised
by s and p downgrading your long term issuer?
I think it was credit rating.
Can you repeat that? Yeah.
Uh, so, um, the s
and p rating, uh, reflects the, the balance sheet strength.
Mm-hmm. And particularly our, uh, uh, key ratios on,
on interest coverage, uh, payment coverage.
So, uh, we, we've got a reasonably good balance sheet, uh,
but we also knew, uh, the, the board got us to go through a,
a capital adequacy exercise on the balance sheet.
So we did have reasonable capacity at that stage to, uh,
determine whether it was appropriate
to make a special dividend or not.
That special dividend has some impacts, of course, in terms
of your, um, uh, interest cost line and aspects of that.
So, uh, we were comfortable with the process.
The board took, uh, a very due consideration of that.
Uh, we were aware that s
and p would, uh, consider the impact
that that would have on our rating.
Uh, and as a result they have, uh,
dropped us a couple of notches.
So as a result, but in terms of, uh, you know,
it's something we're aware of, but it's something we can,
we can manage and,
And no real significant practical implications from
that other than borrowing costs in the
Future. Yeah. There may be a little
bit of marginal cost in it,
but that's well within now,
But you can manage it. Yeah.
Ability to manage. Yep.
So, sorry. And then dang, Paula,
and just your opening comments, you talked about, um,
despite some of the branch closures,
you're looking at retail hubs.
I mean, some of our communities are, are thinking Nelson,
dun, need and Christchurch, you know,
mps have said there've been a number of closures there.
Can you assure the public where
that these retail hubs will be in their communities
or where they can go to?
Will it be, you know, within an hour's drive?
Will it be within 15 minutes?
I mean, I'm just with the branches of closing
and you're gonna do retail hubs,
will they be able to access them?
Which I fact that Yeah, I'll let David answer that
Operation. Yeah. Yeah.
So there, there, there is quite a, uh,
extensive exercise that the team have done.
Uh, as we mentioned earlier,
our footprint is actually very, very big.
And uh, I think if we, compared to other retailers,
we'd have one of the biggest, uh,
footprints in the, in the country.
So we have gone through a process of wanting to, uh,
we've done a lot of mapping around areas about accessibility
and, uh, size of our, uh, retail footprint in some areas.
Uh, like we're building one in Palmerston North at the
moment there as well, a hub similar to
what we have built in new market.
And that will be complimented
with agency partners in various locations.
We've got certain targets around accessibility
and certain, uh, parameters to access
and percentage of population near to sites.
I don't have all that detail
with me right now, but we can share it.
But it has been quite systematically work through
and just to get a balance between a footprint
that we can afford to run as well as high quality access
for New Zealanders that want to access it.
I think
Worth reextend the invitation to mps
to meet with us on what's happening in their own,
um, areas.
Um, we're very happy to do that.
Um, and, and hopefully to give more confidence around it
and there will be ongoing consultation, so
Thank you for that offer offer.
And yeah, I mean, I mean, I
probably say the labor cus would wee actually you come
and brief us just the cold workers
that way you get all the mps at the same time.
So just a supplementary of that.
Um, you'll provide us
with obviously the analysis that you came back to.
I mean, the other, the other question that I had was,
what is, um, will there be public consultation?
Not just, I mean obviously mps represent communities,
but will there be wider public consultation?
Yeah, we, we See, how will they know? Yeah,
So right now we are engaging with our, um,
our agency partners, uh, to give them, uh,
some advice about some areas where we would not be able
to maintain that agency partnership.
And they're generally ones with very,
very low volume, uh, going through them.
The ones that we're talking to at the moment that count
for about 11 or 12% of our, of our footprint,
but only about one and a half to 2%
of our total volume and revenue going through it.
So we've gotta be quite realistic
and practical about how that works.
We are then engaging with another group
of agent partners just with an expression of interest
to see which ones we'd like to continue to partner with us.
And once we've got that feedback later on this year,
we'll make some decisions about which locations we're able
to maintain or change in terms of the communities.
We will have a very proactive advice about
what changes are planned
and where they'll get access, uh, to new sites as they
as new footprint develops.
So, so that's, uh, the process we'll be following. Yeah,
I just highly recommend you engage
with those groups like Gray Power, et cetera, for the,
our seniors who will find access difficult.
Thank you. Alright, a supplementary
Thank you. Just rounding
off this question about, um, your ratings.
Um, has the Supreme Court's decision in the Uber case had an
impact on the way that your ratings
agency have viewed your position?
It's not had an impact date,
but obviously we'll be watching it, um, carefully. Okay.
Yeah. Mm-hmm. Um,
I do wanna ask about that a bit more generally.
Um, so we know that we have now in New Zealand a position
where, um, courier drivers potentially, um, uh, will,
will be considered employees.
How are you working through that as a business?
Will it change the way
that New Zealand post deals with its couriers?
Um, what does that practically mean on the ground?
I, I think, you know, the, the situation
for New Zealand Post it's, we'd love to discuss it, tell,
but we do have a couple of cases
before the courts, so really not in a position
that we can discuss the ins and outs of that decision
and its relevance or otherwise for New Zealand Post.
And, you know, we will respect the findings
of the court at the relevant time.
Yeah. Alright. No, thank you.
Uh, new question from Scott Willis. No, no, no.
Scott will Primely,
Everyone knows the, uh, the electric scooters
that deliver post
and that's a fantastic example of, of
leadership in reducing carbon emissions.
But you've signaled here that you're stepping away
from the Science-Based Targets initiative.
Um, I'm interested to understand why,
and I can, you know, I've got a good sense of why,
but if you could explain in your own words
why you have decided to move away from that initiative.
Yeah, really happy to have the chance to address that
because we are deeply committed to, um,
decarbonization and our part in it,
and we continue to do the things that we have planned to do
to move us in the right direction.
But when the decision was first, um, taken
to move to science-based targets, some
of those assumptions didn't actually turn out to be
what we thought they were.
And frankly, you know, it could cost us as much
as a hundred million dollars to move there,
try to move there now.
And it's just simply beyond us.
And even beyond that, there are other constraints
that we can't meet at this time.
So the board and management's position is we want
to move back to that as soon as we practically can.
Um, but that, um, we also don't want
to pretend right now we're doing something we simply don't
have the means to do.
And so, um,
what we are focused on is doing the things we can both
within our own network to electrify our own fleet,
but also working with some of our partner, um, partners
to encourage them to do the same
and we're having some significant success.
Um, the third leg of our strategy was to work on the,
the larger delivery vehicles.
That's proving if I'm perfectly open with you,
to be harder than we expected.
Um, so right now we're probably doubling down on the other
two limbs and we'll come back to that one too, when hydrogen
and other options become, uh, you know, a,
a closer substitute for us.
So I wouldn't want you to think that we've done that
because we've changed our view on our commitment
to decarbonization.
We have not, um,
it's just simply at this time we're not able to
move in the direction that we had hoped to be able
to move in, but we will be looking for the right time
and opport to move back to a, to to that strategy.
So, um, your movement towards your,
your light vehicle fleet
or decarbonizing your light vehicle fleet, which is one
of the easier things to do, you, you've moved
that out another two years.
Um, is that, is that simply because of increased cost
or is there, is there that thing in
Play? Yeah, there are a couple of
aspects.
It cost is we my primary driver,
but uh, our corporate own right fleet, we've moved
that along a long way.
Uh, and uh, we're getting very close to, uh, getting that
through, uh, a, a full change.
The contract partners that Paul was referring to, we,
we slowed that down a little bit there,
there was both access to, uh, appropriate vehicles as well
as, uh, the contract partner's confidence to pick
that vehicle up, uh, for their own use.
As Paula mentioned. Uh,
so far this year we've seen a really good pickup of that.
About 50 of our contract partners, uh, this year, uh,
this financial year alone have converted to EV vehicles.
So, uh, we'd like to keep that momentum going
and that will balance between how much we can help
that transition versus the general availability
and economics of running those.
But, uh, on the whole, uh, you know, I've spoken to some
of our contract partners delivering an EV vehicles.
There are a lot of reasons why they like them,
but their maintenance costs are lower
and their daily fuel costs are lower,
but normally their first capital cost is a bit higher.
So that, that's what we're working our way through. Okay.
And just One another supplementary
supplement supplementary.
So I mean, I, I agree with you.
Once you've driven an ev you're not gonna go back to a,
a fossil vehicle vehicle,
but, um, in a more difficult economic environment,
what exactly are you doing with your contracted, um,
partners to enable them?
Are you providing them with information?
Are you providing them with, uh, an, um,
some sort of support Yep.
To, to invest or, or a longer term contract?
What, what is it that you're doing?
It's almost all of the above actually. Yeah.
So in terms of, uh, we are working with our
delivery partners on the normal cycle
of vehicle replacement.
So we get a sense of what's due to be replaced.
We have had a small incentive program in place, uh,
where we've supported the position of that.
We spent about half a million dollars a year to support
that, uh, transition of vehicles.
Uh, and uh, each year we reset
that budget both on affordability
and, uh, interest, uh, in the contract partners to do it.
So as you said, this year has been a very good year in terms
of take up of that a cliff.
Alright. A supplementary from Barbara. Yeah, sorry.
So a supplementary of, um, Scott's question, just on page 47
of your annual report, it just talked about the facility
with, uh, SCF Lead, low Emissions Delivery Limited
is SCCF left below Emissions Delivery Limited,
are they a separate company
or is clearly not part of the group?
I just want to check if they're a separate company
that you contract with for that loan facility.
C
Uh, I will check on the detail of that.
I expect that, uh,
we had a partnership with a, uh,
we sending out a partnership through, uh, the, um,
green Investment Fund
and, uh, possibly that as a conversion
of the Green Investment Fund group,
but I'll come back with the specifics of that.
So we did have a lease partnership Tructure Yeah.
That supported the transition, uh, into, um, uh,
Lower mission S contract partners for lower mission.
I, I assume, sorry, I shouldn't have the detail. No,
That's all right. No, that's, thank
you. Alright. Um, new,
Um, and just wanna clarify Madam Chair, um,
were you rolling my previous primary question out
or? Um, no,
So yeah, so I just wanted to go to Scott Willis.
You can start a new primary. Great.
Um, just returning to the workforce issues, um, think
that is an area where people will be very interested in.
Um, one question I have is why is there not, it, it seems
that there isn't a contingency set aside
for the liability associated with the Uber decision.
Why is that and what is the board
considering the potential size of that liability to be?
No, we have no, we have no, uh,
liability put aside for that. Okay. So,
Yeah, I guess, um, why I'm asking is, um,
helpfully Dam Paul, you've set out that these are ongoing
issues that, um, both first union
and, um, I believe we do have raised
with the company over many years.
So you might expect
that there are some outstanding legal issues to be resolved
with the board interested in.
If that's not a contingency, then how should, um,
the members of the New Zealand public sort of look at this,
the size of the potential, um, for this
to have an impact on not only the New Zealand post,
but the entire sort of postal
and career services that we we use in this country? Yeah.
Uh, we, we do not have a contingent liability put aside.
I mean, at this point in time,
and you're probably aware, there were
statements in the judgment about that,
those findings being specific to those facts.
And so the interesting question going forward is,
are those facts present in circumstances
that affect New Zealand Post?
And, you know,
and forming a view on whether we need
to put aside a contingent liability,
we'd be taking into account our own legal advice.
So, right. That I really can't say more than that.
Yeah. So can I say members
that we don't get too speculative here?
No. So yeah, just, uh, this is our opportunity to, um,
assist them on their performance.
Can I ask not speculating stuff can a by
as long as it's not speculating. Yeah, no, no.
It's just to clarify. So you were saying though,
contingent liability for these financial statements or any,
or for the future in your sense?
Well, Oh, that's to be determined. Yeah. Yeah,
That's fine. That's fine.
If there's a change on information. Yeah, I was
Justing just Clarifying if there's a change in
information, then we would consider that,
but the Supreme Court findings came out subsequent to these,
so of course we will revisit that for each
and every set of accounts. Yeah,
I just would've thought for accounting purposes probably
would've come under employee expenses if,
if in the future the court sites. Yeah.
Alright. Uh, you Have a new,
Yeah. Uh, just a,
just a clarification around, um,
what I hope I'm understanding correctly.
So New Zealand Post hasn't done anything in the business to
recognize, um, workers
who might be potentially employees
at all? There's no, could
They have already answered that question?
So if you, do you have a new primary?
No, I'm not sure they have. No, they have,
I've heard, um, I've heard this
Live until, until there's a finding that that is,
that's what they said before the case.
There's not anything for us yet to do. Okay.
And, but as I said, you, we will, you know,
clearly New Zealand Post will comply with any legal findings
that occur in the future. Uh,
It's new primary Scott Willis. Uh,
It's not exactly new, it's just a supplementary.
So, um, I'll have to, um, based on, so you know
what, what I'm saying here.
So as long as it's not speculation
and yeah, as long as it's not a repeat of
what has been already asked, it's fine
for you to have a supplementary.
So back to mobility.
Um, and there's some great work that you've been doing,
the other ripple effects that you can have, but
because you have such a large footprint around the country,
you're dealing with making sure
that the mail gets there on time
or hopefully doesn't actually get there on, on time to me
because I'm on a rural community.
But nevermind, um, the, um, the, what,
what is the impact on,
or how are you, how well are you working with partners
crossing the island to, to the South Island, for example,
making sure that those mobility, um,
options are more decarbonized.
How, how is that, how, how influential are you in making,
helping to decarbonize their mobility?
Well, I mean, we, we pursue every opportunity we have,
and Dave and I both have good connections and Kiwi rail.
And so we, we are exploring with them
whether there's further options
and would we be prepared to sacrifice timeliness for
the ability both at a, on a cost basis,
but also something that is more friendly to the environment.
We we're looking at those opportunities all the time.
And, um, it does, does help
that actually we have great relationship there
and we can explore that.
So moving from South Island, north Island, vice versa.
So we do actively explore those, those, those options.
Sometimes there's a trade off in it, right?
And this is something we're interested in right now.
Is there a demand out there for product that
might not meet the current timeframes,
but customers don't care?
You know, if it took an another 24
hours, it wouldn't matter.
But then we have to also marry up the cost
of the handling of that.
So we are actively exploring that.
It's not out there in the public,
but I don't mind sharing that with you.
Um, we try to do that all the time
and, you know, clearly we're, we're a big player,
so you would like to think we would use, you know,
our position in the market to encourage those opportunity.
And if we can marry it up with a commercial opportunity
that meets the needs out there, then that's even better
because that might help
suppliers in the community achieve an outcome
that is acceptable, but at a lower cost.
So yeah, we definitely,
in looking at those opportunities,
So one final, yeah, so, um,
I'm thinking about how integrated your mobility might be.
So are you using the rail network for example, and,
and the potential for electric aviation?
Um, those, those options, are those,
are those things that are under active
Exploration? Yeah. That,
that practice?
Well, there, there are many things we will keep an eye on
and there are other things that we will trial.
Uh, an example, for the last three
or four years we've been trialing a hydrogen truck in
the northern part of the country.
Uh, and technically it's a great vehicle, uh,
and the drivers love driving it, uh,
but there's a whole lot of
infrastructure and cost and needs.
So I think over time those sort
of initiatives will get natural momentum
as infrastructure builds and,
and price points come closer together.
So we see it as important that we trial those things so
that when those conditions are right,
we know what to expect.
So that's one example.
Uh, we, uh, also remember the Climate Leaders Coalition
and they have subgroups
and there are times with industry, uh, players to try
and connect and discuss certain topics.
So, uh, where it makes sense, we will get involved in those
as well to see if there are industry solutions,
uh, on certain aspects.
Uh, and um, yeah, we do work, uh,
with our, some of our customers.
IKEA we've talked about as a good example.
Uh, one of the reasons that we were successful in the tender
partnership is our ability to be able
to offer an EV solution in Auckland.
Uh, so that is what we are doing to support that also.
So there's lots of things
and there's also a big challenge for all of us to continue
that momentum, but mm-hmm.
Uh, we, we do keep an active interest
in trying to find solutions.
Okay. And new primary from Dr. David Wilson.
Um, you mentioned technology
and innovation through your report, which is good.
It's a little bit hard to grab onto it.
So I'll ask this question.
Where do you think your fo I are in terms of technology
and innovation heading forward?
Where do you think those areas are
that you want to concentrate on?
Do you want to quickly that, uh, well, firstly, uh, Paula,
uh, talked about, uh, the, uh,
processing capabilities that we put in.
So we've now got, uh, about four
or five major automated processing sites.
They're great for some reasons.
It helps us to scale up efficiently in terms of,
I think last night we had 550,000,
I think you mentioned earlier, 550,000 parcels
enter the network last night.
Our processing capacity allows us now
to move those efficiently and sort them very smartly.
On top of that, we get a lot of information.
We get data now that we can start used to,
uh, communicate well.
So when you get a notification on your phone about
where your item is, we're getting that information out of
that smart processing that we're doing.
And your tracking actually works.
Your tracking actually works.
Yeah, it's, uh, we we're pretty happy with it.
So, uh, yeah, we get feedback when it doesn't.
I, I'm, I'm sure you, um, the other part is, uh, some
of those notifications are also, uh, managed through, uh,
smart, um, AI type tools that start
to put protective information about on a, on a good journey,
where would you expect that item to be?
And we're able to check how that's going.
So that's one aspect that we are, um, starting
to use technology to improve our business.
We also see in the next wave
of having a much smarter network,
can we fill trucks up more efficiently?
Can we get our, uh, our network, uh, um,
transport plans more, more efficient and smarter
and that they will also add to, uh,
decarbonization opportunities for us.
So that's another area where we'll start prioritizing
our focus to try and use smart tools
to make us smart business as well.
So, so there's lots of things in there.
We'd always like to spend more,
but we're getting that balanced up between, uh,
the affordability and the advantage
that comes with it as well.
Primarily around logistics and efficiency. That's right.
That's our primary, uh, first gold.
'cause the smart you can use that information the smarter
you can be as a business.
Yeah. But we'll consider how we can use
that information in broader sense over time.
But, uh, that, that's a later question Right Now, using it
to be a a smart business is the best bang for buck.
Thank you. I think you'll find when we're here next year,
hopefully we'll be, um, you know, it's
in my experience with the transformations you get really
focused on these big project builds, right?
And the efficiency they bring.
But the real test comes with what you do with it
for the customer in the second phase.
So you optimize the network to the new kit,
but then how do you build a customer led business on the
back of it and use a lot of smart tech,
you know, to, to improve that service.
And so, you know, from a board's perspective,
we're really looking to the management team now, not say,
take a deep sigh 'cause we got all that built
and it's performing well.
No, the next stage really is vital
to getting all the benefits out
of the investment that's been made.
Yeah. Alright. I Williams, thank
You. Um,
trying to understand the,
what's going on in the courier part of the business, um,
with costs, costs seem to be rising on that side to, um,
for both New Zealand post and competitors.
Um, about 5% seems to be, uh,
year on year in the last two years.
Um, what's going on there?
We've got the prices of snaps going up,
we've got an increase in volumes,
but also the price of couriers going up.
It seems suddenly like there might be, um, you know, uh,
something that is worth competing for.
So what does that mean for the
competition going on in this market?
Are we going to see more competitors enter into New
Zealand's, uh, courier system like the one
that's owned at Abu Dhabi
and is greatly gobbling up the market share?
Pick that. Yeah. Uh, we do very well on market share.
Um, we, uh, we would be the biggest B2C deliver, uh,
business to consumer delivery, uh, network in the country.
So, and we do that very well. Uh, so, uh,
What is your market share? I couldn't tell.
Uh, it, it's really, it's really hard to define.
It's not like other industries where you've got all,
all the, uh, data points to get it,
but we are about 40
to 45% total parcel delivery market share in the country.
We are probably 70% of the B2C market delivery.
Now, we don't take that for granted.
And, uh, we know it is very, very competitive out there.
The cost structures are going up, fuel is going up.
Uh, we are all, uh, dealing
with the increased costs in our business.
So we've all gotta be sensible about
how we drive efficiency in the business as well as
how we price to, to our customers as well.
So, uh, we're all navigating our way through that.
But there is plenty of competition.
There are gig delivery businesses that pop up,
come and go a bit.
Uh, there are very good other operators in the country
that we are always competing with as well,
but I'm backing us to, to know we're doing a good job
and we're, we've got a great customer base as well.
Um, are you leading the price rises?
Are other market participants in the courier industry
following your prices up?
Oh, look, I think it, uh, it,
it is a truly competitive market out there.
So, uh, I think we all work, uh, to understand
what is a fair price structure,
what is the market telling us?
So I I, I think right now, particularly as,
as David Paula mentioned earlier, uh, in a softer economy,
there is more capacity that drives more competition.
So I can assure you there is some pretty robust,
uh, uh, challenges out there. I,
I think, I think, you know, I'd like to just add that we,
we need to be price competitive
and we should be able to, given our size
and the investments we've made,
but really in the long run, we need to, we need
to just fill the market in terms of quality of service,
and that's what we aim to do.
And that's what we're, you know, we,
we're not gonna u rest on just being a big
player in the room.
We, if you wanna hold that position, you have
to provide a quality service.
And we think we're positioned right now
as well as we've ever been.
So, you know, we, we will try to maintain margins,
not just by using our size and marketplace,
but by sustainably doing it, by providing superior service.
And if you look at some of the gains we've made
with customers, it's because of
that we're more reliable service.
So, um, the customer comes to us, even if they go,
sometimes they come back pretty smartly.
I guess that's my question. Um, over the last five years,
New Zealand Post has had millions of dollars
of public investment into its ability to, um,
drive costs out of the business, optimize, automate, um,
and keep costs low.
And yet consumers are paying more on both sides,
including the increasingly profitable side of,
of the packages.
Um, what is going on here in terms
of providing public service cheaply
and managing to cross-subsidize those parts of the business
that will never be profitable?
I mean, should we expect those services that cost money,
like the rural services, like the services
that are lifelines to communities like on D Island, um,
are they in danger if more market share is lost
to a competitor that has no interest in doing that?
Yeah, it, it, the, the market share question is, uh,
there are two markets, uh, as we talked about earlier.
The, the leader market is a function primarily
of people having different ways to communicate digitally.
Most of us get our bank statements on our phone and,
and, uh, the small businesses you're referring to earlier,
lots of 'em will use a zero type, uh,
invoicing billing system.
So lots of New Zealand businesses
and people are communicating differently.
That is the primary reason why mail
decline, uh, is occurring.
And we've been responding to that
and we've had to make sure we've made some really smart
decisions about how to keep pace with that change.
On the other hand, the parcel business is a truly, uh,
market competitive business,
and our pricing is tested every day.
Our, our, our competitors are out there, uh,
knocking on our customers' doors, vice versa.
So I don't think there's, uh, assumption that says, uh,
our price point is anything different than
what the market is, uh, expecting.
And, uh, we play pretty,
pretty robustly in that space as well. Hmm.
Um, what would, what would you expect the impact on costs
to be if New Zealand Post had employees and its business
Had, sorry, Had had a network
of employees rather than contract partners?
Oh, look, I, it's quite a difficult question to
consider really, our, our, our structures work well for us
and, uh, and, uh, we're getting a very good value in terms
of that relationship, both in customer services,
Paula talked about,
but also ensuring our contract partners
also have an opportunity to get a fair, uh, opportunity
to grow their business as well.
Okay. So, Sorry, just one more question.
Yes. Okay. Yeah. Um, nothing in the minister's leader
of expectations, um,
or, uh, what publicly available seems to suggest
that there is a protection for the
affordability of those services.
Um, how do you think about that internally?
What are the protections that New Zealanders have that, um,
you know, with one large player that's not required
to offer a, a service affordably, um, you then might think
or guess that there isn't, there needs
to be robust protections around price rises.
I think most of our, most of our markets are competitive
and the best protection for any consumer, it's competition.
Um, absolutely as former chair of the Commerce Commission,
I know that, well, it's very hard
to substitute for that in any way.
And, um, I think the area where in rural areas
where there may not be as much competition in the
letter side, um, the economics are such that
New Zealand Post will want to, to respond to that
and maintain that, um,
because it's, it, it helps support its cost base.
So, you know, I think the answer to this is
you want to have competition in the market, you know, as,
as New Zealand posts, you know,
be great if we didn't play so much competition.
But for the country, it is the best thing,
the best protection for consumers is competition
and the best, you know,
and it is helpful to competition
that New Zealand Post has invested in its own systems
and processes, force others to do the same,
to provide better services.
And that will at some point be reflected in price.
Doesn't mean price will go down,
but prices will be lower than they would've
otherwise been for a given level of service.
So I, it's kind of a, you know, it may not,
may not quite be in the realm that you wanted,
but I, I do really believe that is
what protects the New Zealand consumer is
the competitive process. All right.
I'll ask a, uh, question here.
This is about, um, the critical safety
and wellbeing of staff.
So your report says that the number
of incidents you've had this year is, I mean,
the year interview is 77,
which is down from the previous year.
Uh, there were 83 incidents then, uh, are you able
to tell us what are the, the nature of these incidents
and um, uh, I mean, it's going in the right direction.
So are you feeling confident
or was it just like, uh,
just randomly the number came to 77?
I don't think it's random at all.
I mean, this company takes health
and safety of its people extraordinarily, um, seriously.
And the board does as well.
I mean, one of the things I like about this new board is
they're all out there in the network doing health
and safety visits and it makes a difference.
And the focus on critical risks has made a huge difference
to New Zealand coast as it has other companies.
And you'll see that a lot of the,
what you see is near misses rather than actuals
because that system is allowing us to pick it up.
But I'll let Dave talk to what the key areas are.
'cause I know it's material.
We, we anticipated that question.
Yeah. Yeah. The, the, uh, measure we put in our report,
it's a bit of a lead indicator on the critical events.
So they wouldn't have necessarily resulted in a injury
or an accident, but there are things that really could,
and particularly ones that could be
the worst case outcomes for us.
So we do have a whole series of critical risks in the health
and safety space that we've prioritized and, and, uh,
and make sure we're put in good controls on it.
Of that list of 77, it, as you mentioned, it has improved
by about six or 7% a year over the last few years.
Uh, and the, uh, the primary things that we are having
to keep a, an eye on is, uh, working from heights
or things at height that could fall off shelves
or sorting machines.
Uh, we've also got many forklift movements,
uh, through our business.
So things that move things around on our floors
that interact, uh, with people present high risk to us.
And of course, we have thousands
of people out on the roads every day,
and that is an inherently risky place.
So there are probably three of the biggest areas
of critical risk, uh, of a list of about seven
or eight that we keep a close eye on.
So the majority of the 77 are referred
to would probably come out of the, the top three in terms
Of, yeah. So anything major
in these, anything major in these reports?
Uh, no. They're, uh, we also do, uh,
tests on severity rate.
Yeah. Uh, and that's primarily injuries
that would result in someone being off work
more than seven days.
Uh, and, uh, we're seeing
that trending down as well at the moment.
And to be clear, none of us want
to see any of our people hurt.
Some of them are out of our control of dog bites
and things like that occur for many of our posties
and couriers out there also.
So there are some things that are
quite challenging for our people.
We've also done a lot of work in the wellbeing space
and we, uh, we got an award last year
or really this year in terms of, uh, our work in the, uh,
psychosocial health area.
And that's been a really good program within the business.
We're already pleased about how that's,
uh, playing out as well.
So the stone, Paul said, health
and safety is really important.
It must be, uh, we are everywhere in the country.
We do a lot of movement,
so we've gotta be very, very bridging.
Yeah. No, thank you. Um, Barbara, um,
just wanna ask a little bit about how the
acquisition on onboarding of PBT has gone
and whether since the Commerce Commission gave you approval
in 24 to do the acquisition, how much more market
have you had an increase in market share?
I mean, they did note that the career,
they thought there was enough sufficient competition there,
but have you seen actually any increase in comp, um,
increase increasing co, um, increasing share since the
acquisition of PBT?
And how did that onboarding go? Yeah,
Look, it was a very specific, uh, investment Yeah.
Which we thought about quite carefully.
Uh, in fact, it was a really good example of, uh,
people within our team working really well collaboratively.
We had people right across the business
and operations customer.
Uh, so onboarding three
and a half thousand customers in a very short window was a,
uh, was a real task.
Uh, it has performed right on where we expected it
to in terms of, uh, both, uh, the transition
of those customers into New Zealand Post
and the fit into the network
that we've talked about investing in our ability
to process those
and deliver them at very high quality is something we were
sure we'd be able to do.
We've surveyed those customers that come across
and their, uh, satisfaction rate is, uh, equal,
if not better than our standard customer base.
So we're pretty pleased at how well that is done.
Uh, and as I said earlier,
that the data points are right in line with
what our business case the board expected it to be.
So, um, we're, we're pretty, pretty pleased at how that is,
uh, paid out for us.
Any increase in market share
Since then? Uh, only in line
with what the, uh, or what
Was expected at time.
I'm trying to remember it, it,
and we can come back with a more accurate answer,
but it might've been, uh, two, three, um,
percentage points on,
So you got 3000 new courier customers.
Did the people, did the actual couriers
themselves, were they,
Uh, uh, we, a few of their couriers came over,
but only a very few.
Okay. Uh, but most of it we could, uh,
bring into our existing footprint
with our existing career partners.
David, Um, from
Thank you. Um,
just thinking about those communities that are losing,
uh, postal service, um, either a box
or a shop, um, how has, how have you decided
where those are going to be, um,
and interested in the consultations
that you've said will continue?
That's a great thing. Um, have any
of those concluded already
and what feedback you've had from those
communities who've been affected?
Uh, so, uh, we have started the process.
So in terms of the rural, uh, sorry,
the urban retail stores, I'm assuming is
what you're referring to.
Uh, we have had engagement with, uh, about 90 sites, uh,
giving them a view that, uh, we intending
to not continue that, uh, process.
We will conclude that, uh, really next year in terms of, uh,
finalizing that feedback process in terms of the question of
how we make a decision of how many sites
and where we have done some quite sophisticated mapping of
how many people exist in an area,
how accessible would a site be,
and what, uh, retail partners exist in those areas.
And we're doing a expressions of interest process
with those partners now
to get clarity about which ones
you'd like to continue with us.
And then we'll go through a process of
how many we need once we've finished that process,
which again, will be through to the first quarter
of next calendar.
And we will be communicating with communities about
where they can access those services in the future.
Um, just a final step for me on this one, for those, um,
people, perhaps older New Zealanders
or, um, perhaps vulnerable New Zealanders with medical needs
who use the postal services in the local area for, um,
sending say samples
or, um, you know, engaging
with other services like health services
through the postal service, does
that come into your decisions around retaining services
and can communities that want to retain their services
and they've been told that those make those arguments
around sort of vital users of their local post?
Uh, it, it is a difficult, uh, balance
that we're always navigating, which is both, uh,
generally people are using the postal service
dramatically less than what they used to.
Uh, when I first started here,
there was 750 million mail items that live at a year.
Then Paula said we were down to 158 million
and we'll see that go.
So it's difficult, right.
In terms of that, we are aware there are parts
of the communities that rely on post and,
and that's something we know we are still
maintaining a postal network.
We've still got a, uh, universal service obligation.
We've still got a lot of
foundational things that we need to do.
Accessibility of, uh, how you, uh, know
where you can get services.
We've got very good information on our websites about
where our post boxes are, where our store networks are.
So people who need assistance could get people
to help them in terms of understanding where they are.
Mm-hmm. Uh, in some cases, uh, people might also want
to use our pickup from home courier services.
So, so that's a service that we offer as well.
So there are options there.
I appreciate it's difficult for some parts of our community,
but that is what we continue to balance as we, uh, work
through the dynamics
of a structurally changing, uh, service. Mm-hmm.
So, um, a, a very, very quick question. Uh, Scott Willis.
Yes, Thank you. And it's a supplementary, so, um,
understanding we're in a transition period.
You, uh, are you looking as a public service
still an essential public service?
Are you looking or planning
to seek some further investment from the government
to maintain that public service?
To, to, to ensure that it doesn't just fall off?
For our rural, for our elderly, for our,
our regional communities,
We, we, we are not seeking additional government support.
Um, we received government support during the period
of our investment program and got us through that period.
Our projections should suggest we can
support our obligations under the deed and to the community.
Um, not, I was gonna say comfortably,
but that's tempting fate.
Um, but we do believe we can do that.
We're grateful for the support we had
as we did the investment.
Um, now I think it's reasonable for everyone
to expect us to deliver on the
expectations of that investment.
And, um, you know, I'm extremely proud of the team.
Even this year, um, we are on plan
and we are strongly on plan at this point in the year.
Everything just determined in the next few weeks whether
we'll stay there or not, but on our projections,
and I don't think the board was concerned
that they not be too optimistic.
They had to be realistic.
We believe we can meet our service, um, obligations
and expectations of communities based on the investments
that have been made and the progress we're making
as a business, um, to be, uh, to provide,
you know, the right services in the right places, uh,
at the best price we can
and to be competitive in the market.
And, and, you know, I can't see right now that
that's not feasible.
So, no, we are not at this point seeking any further
government support.
All right. Uh, dear Paula
and David, the time for this hearing is finished.
Are there any concluding remarks, uh, from you?
No, I'd just like to thank the committee
and, um, I said to Dave
before we came in, it's just a great opportunity
to tell you the story of Museum on Post,
not just from the past, but what we're doing
to ensure we have good service
for the community going forward.
So we welcome the opportunity. So thank you so much.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Absolutely. Move into private session.